The Project Gutenberg eBook of Bigfoot Joe and Others, by Henry
Bedford-Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Bigfoot Joe and Others

Author: Henry Bedford-Jones

Release Date: February 27, 2022 [eBook #67519]

Language: English

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIGFOOT JOE AND OTHERS ***






[Transcriber's note: spelling and grammar oddities have been
preserved as printed]





  BIGFOOT JOE
  And Others


  Figments of Fancy, Written
  Hand-set in Type, &
  Printed, by


  H BEDFORD-JONES



  Done At Lakeport
  MCMXX




To The KING

Most Gracious Sovereign,

I beg leave to approach Your Royal Person with an humble Offering,
glean'd from long acquaintance with Your Majesty's subjects.  A Work,
which owes it's Rise, it's Progress, and Completion to this Source,
is hence with all Humility proffered to Your Sacred Majesty.  That
Providence may long preserve the blessings of Your Reign to this
Profession and Nation, is the constant prayer of,

May it please Your Majesty,

Your Majesty's most humble and devoted

Servant and Subject,

H. BEDFORD-JONES

To HUMBUG, Rex et Imperator.




CONTENTS


BIG FOOT JOE

THE CLEAR WORD

THE NAKED MAN

ONE NIGHT AT HEALY'S

THE SHEPHERD'S FAILURE




BIGFOOT JOE


In a town of the north there dwelt three men apart from their
fellows.  One of these men was a Philosopher, one was a Poet, and one
was a Painter.  These lived and wrought, while all the folk looked up
to them from afar off.  There was a halfbreed called Bigfoot Joe who
hewed in a lumber camp, so that the folk knew nothing of him.

The Philosopher penned a mystical work on the philosophy of the
woods, and he grew known in the world.  The Poet wrote stanzas filled
with the music of the pines and cedars, and his verse brought high
wage.  The Painter limned a single hemlock, instinct with the breath
of the lonely forest; and it found fame.  But, deep in the woods,
trees crashed down and the unknown lumberjack lopped off their
branches.

Now it so happened that a certain Great Author, having heard of the
famous Three, journeyed across the seas to visit them; for he was an
unwearied seeker after the truth that is in life.

The Artists, receiving him as a brother, expounded to him the
philosophy and rhythm and tonal harmony of Nature; but the Great
Author warmed himself in their steam-heated studios and said little.

One day the Artists took the distinguished guest on a visit to the
woods.  They came to camp in time to lunch with the jacks, and the
visitor was seated next Bigfoot Joe.  Naturally observant, he noted
that the halfbreed, coming from the woods bare-headed, flung an
expressive glance at the thick furs of the Philosopher.

During their meal the Painter apologized for the coarse fare--the
beans and bread, the creamless coffee; but the halfbreed gorged
hugely, and drank his molasses-sweet coffee with gusto.  The Poet was
disgusted by the table manners of the jacks, for a bread-fight arose
amid jests and curses; but the halfbreed deftly caught a crust and
devoured it.

Later, the visitors went to the woods and watched the work.
Presently they came to Bigfoot Joe; the others would have passed on
but the Great Author paused and spoke.

"B'jou," replied the halfbreed, wiping his brow and staring at the
stranger.

"Is the work hard?"

"It is my work--I am strong, me!  You little man, wear four eyes."
His gaze swept in contempt over the visitor.  "Dis tree, she's be my
brudder; she's be tall, strong like me.  'Bon!' she's say.  'You good
lumberjack, you Joe!'"  And his axe bit a deep chord of assent from
the heart of the pine.

The Great Author perceived that here was a philosopher, who drew from
the woods his one rule: "Work!  You are here; so it is evident that
you were to be a lumberjack--but be careful to be a _good_
lumberjack!"

The halfbreed was a poet, for he could read the secret heart of the
woods and make response from his own.  He was a painter, whose brush
was the axe; with that brush he limned great canvases, whose truth
all woodsmen loved instantly.

The Philosopher groped after his soul, the Painter strove to express
his soul, and the Poet tried to clothe his soul in words.  The
half-breed, caring nothing about soul, struck fire from the spirit of
the Great Author, who knew what a plain thing the soul really is;
this, in fact, was why he was a Great Author.

And so, when he had returned again to his own country, the Great
Author neglected to write about the famous Artists.  Instead, he
penned a wonderful tale about a halfbreed Indian, and the world cried
out in rapture.

But the three Artists bitterly termed him an ignorant fakir.




From the "Sonnet" of Felix Arvers

  Within my soul there lies a secret, thieved
    Eternally from Love, that knows no sleep.
    All innocent it she whose name lies deep
  Enshrined upon my heart, nor has she grieved
  With love's kind sorrow; naught have I achieved
    Though alway at her side.  Thus shall I keep
    My secret, while I live.  How might I reap
  Rewards unsought, when none can be received?

  For she, to whom God gave a soul so tender,
    Goes calmly on her way, and will not hear
  The murmured homage Love would gladly render;
    So pure is she, so quiet and austere!
  Scanning my lines, "Who can this angel be?"
  She smiling asks--and fails herself to see.




THE CLEAR WORD


There has been a good deal of mysticism in the public prints
lately--emanations from Point Loma, perhaps; subtle propaganda.

They are interesting, these men with the wide eyes.  They write about
a multitude of things; they are masters of glowing phrases, golden
wordings, witchery of thought.

Eternally invincible are they, being very nebulous and vague.  So
lofty are their ideals and visions that never by any chance can they
be brought down to concrete wordings.  Fixed in the abstract, they
leave to their readers the interpretation of these sacred
thought-gems.

Fine fluidity rounds the paragraphs, and a wizardry of poeticism
gilds the pages, until any central idea is lost in dazzled wonder at
the pyrotechnics.  The type of writing is intoxicating but not tonic.
It is impressionistic and owns a very vague sense of philology; "vers
libre" is a case in point.  Art or music may legally convey
impressions, but the business of words is to convey thought; each
word in the language is an historical entity.  When words are so
cleverly conjoined as to present only an impression, something is
amiss.

Our mystics have some central thought, spread it across scores of
pages, and lose it; they are style et praeterea nihil.  They won't
play to the gallery, preferring the circle.  As a matter of fact,
they have no hope of ever reaching the gallery.

It is the great mass of our fiction magazines that reflect the
gallery, the vox populi.  Magazinedom is aligned in favor of the
story related with an artful simplicity--the clear word!

The clear word; that is the thing!  The forthright, honest word,
signifying something foursquare and definite!  When Snorri quilled
that great chronicle, the Heimskringla, his words fitted like a
mosaic; he left us a perfect example of the clear word.

A work of literature creates a character, then evolves it through the
stress of exterior circumstances.  The magazine story takes its
character ready-made, evolving a plot through the stress of that
character upon exterior circumstances.  If we regard this as
cheapening of a noble art, and decidedly infra dig., then recollect
how our grandsires applied like terms to Dumas and other masters.

The past twenty years have here evolved a type of magazine that
serenely ignores the ranting of the Elder Brethren.  It has created a
writer as peculiar to this country as is the feuilletoniste to
France.  These magazines of fiction have filled a gap; and they have
been eagerly acclaimed by the reading public.

This reading public, not being confined to the New England states but
being comprised largely of hoi polloi, does not want character
studies.  It wants a well-ordered, wholly false and often absurd
plot-scheme, progressing in a straight line instead of by zigzag
dashes, as in life; but it demands that this plot-scheme be
plausible, intricate and fascinating.

A new fiction magazine makes its curtsey by deploring these facts and
apologetically devotes its pages only to the highest forms of
writing.  Stuff!  Why cringe to the Elder Brethren?  An editor
interprets the wishes of the public; he is not to suit his own whims,
but to make money for the owners.

The public knows what it wants, and will pay to get it.  The mystics
may become the oracles of new cults, may set about remaking their own
petty worlds after their hearts' desires; but they cannot make a
living by the quill.  Even the music critics have come from their
misty pinnacles.

Simplicity has cash value.  That is why the magazines pay such
excellent prices for the clear word--which is the hardest of all to
write.




  LA CATHEDRALE ENGLOUTIE

  Bells far and fine
  Lost evermore
  To the blue sky,
  Yet still implore
  And bid us fly
  The citied roar,
  To seek God's shrine
  And hold divine
  The rich, deep things
  That men decry.
  A bell that rings
  And echoes o'er
  On angels' wings;
  Sweetly it sings--
  "All life is thine!
  Give God an hour
  And feel His power
  Steal far and fine
  Like bells across
  The city's dross--"




THE NAKED MAN


A section of the Argonne wood is feebly lighted by distant star
shells.  Over the mechanical and human wreckage eddies the vapor of
poison gas; yet the two men sitting against the ruined
gun-emplacement wear no masks, and seem not to feel the gas.  One is
a husky chap, a marine; his left foot, gone above the ankle, is
replaced by an ineffectual tourniquet.  The other is a conscript;
across his breast is a wide gash of bubbling red.

Nearby lies a German, bayonet-gashed, who from time to time opens his
eyes.  At his knee lies an empty U.S.A. canteen.

The Marine: You were a damn' fool to give him that bottle!  Not that
it matters to us, only--

The Conscript, smiling: You gave him yours first!

The Marine: Sure; I figured yours 'ud do us, but we should worry now!
Say, Fritzie learned somethin' about fightin' today, huh?

The Conscript: I feel like writing a poem about it; only I'll never
write it, of course--

The Marine: Cut the comedy, bo!  Say, the way you knifed this guy was
one swell bit o' work!  After he ploughed you up, too!

The poet-conscript shivers.  The German opens his eyes wide and looks
at them.

The German: Listen--the music!  Can you hear it?  The Brunhilde
motif; it is the valkyr coming for me--

His eyes close again, his head droops.

The Marine: Plumb nuts; I bet he ain't et a square meal in a year!
Say, what d'you figure on seein' next, bo?

The Conscript, blankly: Eh?

The Marine: Why, we don't swallow no bull about fightin' for
democracy and goin' to heaven; everybody except the home folks is
wise to that bunk.  But where do we land on the other side, hey?
Fightin' Heinie won't ticket us to the pearly gates, will it?

The Conscript, gazing at the curling trees in the mist: Search me!
Religion never bothered me much; and just now I'm sorry.

The Marine: Sorry, hell!  Cut out the regrets.  If you hadn't give
that guy your canteen we might ha' lasted till morning.

The Conscript: If you hadn't crawled to help prop him up, your
tourniquet might not have given way--

Suddenly startled, both men turn their heads.  Before them appears
the figure of a man, nearly naked, an open wound in his side; he is
regarding them attentively.

The Marine: Hullo!  Where in hell did you come from--front lines?
Sit down and take it easy; no Croy Rouge nor nothin' here to hurry
you.  Got it bad?

The Conscript: Here's an extra first-aid packet--better stop the
bleeding.

The naked man moves closer, but refuses the proffered packet.

The Naked Man: Thank you, brother, but it would do me no good.

The Marine: I guess you're right there.  Bayonet, hey?  Jabbed up an'
got you.

The Naked Man: I've come from inside the German lines.

The Conscript: Captured and got away, eh?  Stripped off your uniform--

The Marine: What's your division?  I bet Liggett's corp's been
catchin' hell!

The Naked Man: I am unattached.

The Marine, feebly tossing out his mask: Take this; it can't help me,
but there's gas around.

The Naked Man: Thanks, brother, but I hardly think it would help me,
either.

The naked man moves, to show them his wounded feet.  He opens his
hands; and the conscript breaks into a bitter cry.

The Conscript: By God!  Crucified you, like they did to the Canucks!

The Marine, pityingly: Aw, hell!

The German soldier opens his eyes, staring about in vacant wonder.

The German: To whom are you talking?  There is no one here.  Ach, the
Valkyr song!  It is drawing nearer--

The naked man throws him a glance of stern pity.  Then he turns and
extends his hand to the conscript.

The Naked Man: Come!  I'll help you--

The Conscript, smiling: No use, pard!  You chase along--we're here
for keeps.

The Naked Man: Take my hand and get up!  I've come to take you home.

The Marine, laughing harshly: Home!

With a faint shrug, the conscript touches the extended hand, grips
it, and rises.  In his face dawns amazed incredulity.

The Conscript: Good lord!  I believe I can walk after all!

The naked man turns and holds out his hand to the marine in silent
command.

The Marine, roughly: Aw, don't be a fool--can't you see I only got
one foot?  You guys chase along--

The Naked Man: I tell you, come!  Put an arm around my neck; we'll do
very well.  Take my hand and get up!

Compelled, the marine obeys.  Into his bronzed face leaps surprise as
he rises.  After getting one arm about his helper's neck, he pauses
suddenly.

The Marine: Look here, you ain't in no shape to stand us both--

The Naked Man: Be quiet, brother!  We are going home, and you need
not doubt my strength.  Come, let us go.

They start away, the marine moving by awkward hops, but moving.  The
conscript holds to the arm of the naked man, throwing him sidelong
glances of frightened surmise--and at length checks himself abruptly.

The Conscript: I don't know if I'm out of my head--no, no!  It's an
impossibility.  I'm afraid even to think of it--

The naked man smiles.  Behind them the German once more opens his
eyes and looks about in wonder.

The German: Where are they gone?  No one is here--they were talking,
yet I see no one.  I can see no one!

The naked man casts over his shoulder a look of ineffable sorrow.
From him comes a murmur.

The Naked Man: No, you can see no one.  You cannot even see ME!  And
that, as you shall come to know, is hell.




  LES DEUX CORTEGES

  Within the church two companies are met.
    The one is sad and bears an infant's bier,
    A woman following; slow steals the tear
  On her pale cheek, where grief his mark has set.
  The other, a baptism.  Protecting arm
    Held close, a nurse upbears the precious mite;
    Comes the young mother, whose proud looks invite
  Praise and allegiance to her baby's charm.
  They christen, they absolve; the chapels clear.
    Then the two women, crossing in the aisle,
    Exchange a single glance at joining there;
    And--wondrous mystery to inspire a prayer--
  The young wife weeps in gazing on the bier,
    The mourner throws the newborn child a smite!




ONE NIGHT AT HEALY'S


We recall many a charming tale, done in the most Lamb-like of
accents, regarding the rare and curious old volumes picked up at the
farthing stalls.  Le Gallienne has reminisced most delightfully and
incredibly in this fashion, as have others; but I, for one, long ago
decided that these degenerate days never witnessed such discoveries
as those recorded in le temps jadis.

Many and many an hour have I spent delving along dusty shelves in
grimy shops, or by the less alluring ways of the spick-and-span,
rebound and furbished, dustless and listed Olde Book Shoppe whose
displays are priced at their weight in carets.  In both have I been
disappointed.  Many a catalog have I pored over, only to decide that
all catalogs are supplied from publishers' remainders.

One concludes that the old book trade is a thing of the past, at
least so far as we none too affluent consumers are concerned.  The
dealers know too much about their wares and are too eager after
excess profits.  They fatten upon the rich manufacturer who seeks
scholarly polish, or the scholar who has inherited the price of
gratification.  If they find an Elzevir, however mean, they placard
it at a rare price, and await the victim who thinks that all Elzevirs
are treasures.

Once, indeed, I found a little shop in New Orleans, off the tourist
lanes, where I encountered over a score of delightful volumes in
French, filled with hand-tinted plates, at some very low figure.
Alas!  I had just been entrapped in Royal street and had but little
money left.  I bought a number of the sweet tooled-morocco volumes at
some little sacrifice, and went my way.  Later, in funds, I returned
for the remainder of the set, only to find that a famous playwright
had discovered the treasure--and all were vanished.

With this exception, luck was seldom mine.  Old book shops were many,
bargains few.  From city to city it was the same old story; until,
upon a cold and foggy night in San Francisco, I chanced to pass the
forbidding and grimy portal of a shop kept by one Healy.

I merely sniffed and turned to catch a jitney; I had come from a
survey of certain downtown shops and felt that I had no more time to
waste.  Then I saw the proprietor, sitting in an easy-chair in his
window, which framed dull old spectacles within a luxuriant and
mighty fringe of reddish-grey whiskers.  Fascinated, I turned again.
Once more to try my luck!  Hopeless though I knew it to be, I would
still essay the impossible--and I entered.

Truth to tell, my entry was compelled less by hope than by that
curious spectacle in the window.  In the doorway I came to a pause,
aghast before a dim array of shelves which at some prior day had been
assorted, but were now jumbled and heaped in a most erratic madness
of confusion.

The fringed old gentleman in the easy chair was reading one of his
own books; and this was an excellent sign.  He barely vouchsafed a
grunt to my greeting, directed me to switch on the lamps and help
myself, then resumed his book and a huge pipe.

As directed, I turned on the lights and began my explorations.
Already the mystic alchemy of this stage-setting held me gripped in a
pleasant excitation, a glowing confidence that here awaited unguessed
treasure-trove!

Mirabile dictu!  At the very first turn I pulled down a glorious big
volume, newly bound in half morocco, which proved to be no other than
Dr. Shaw's Travels in Barbary.

Every map, every letter and engraving and page was perfect, even the
paper was as chastely unblemished as when struck off the press of
Oxford University in the days of the first George.  The press-work,
like that of the first folio of Beaumont & Fletcher, was a delight to
the eye; abounding in Arabic, old-style Greek, Hebrew and
less-remembered tongues, it was all as nobly executed as if it had
been drawn by hand and lithographed.

A price was penciled on the flyleaf; it would scarcely have amounted
to taxicab fare home.  I sighed over the high insolence that prompts
dealers to face their customers with the prices these wares fetched
twenty or fifty years ago; then I turned to the fringed divinity with
tremulous query.

"Everything marked plain," he made response, without raising his eyes
from the book in his lap.

Ye gods and little bookworms--the dream had come true!  Or was it a
chance find--perhaps some lure to catch unwary feet?

No matter; within five minutes dinner was forgotten, all
responsibilities put aside, and I was hooked fast.  Those unordered
shelves held everything from Russian novels to French scientific
treatises, and Americana ran riot.

Imagine a copy of Vetelius, that rare edition of saga-chants, for
fifty cents; and, no less expensive, a spanking fine copy of Mme. de
Grandfort's execrated work on the Louisiana Creoles, serene in its
dingy binding of ante-bellum days!  Here was the sort of place
hitherto found only in romancers' tales!

And a little old French handbook for gardeners, with quaintly tinted
plates; or a first edition of Palgrave, or a historical work from the
library of the Garde Royale Hussars!

Then the discovery of Ripperda's memoirs--Ripperda, that fine
Hollander who became a Spaniard, wearing the collar of the Golden
Fleece and ruling all the wide realms of Spain, then passed into
Morocco and ruled that land as pasha--Ripperda, who took new
religions or families at will, but ruled always until the gout
fetched him to a devout Christian end--here was the crowning find!

I staggered home that night freighted with treasure.  A few days
later I returned, with the intent of further March and seizure; but
this time I did not enter.  I only turned mournfully from the
doorway, above which flaunted the dire announcement:

THIS PLACE HAS CHANGED HANDS




  With a Branch of Semper-virens

  Unto the end that age to age shall know
    The perfect love which Ronsard gave in fee,
  How your warm beauty laid cold reason low
    And held in fetters all his liberty;
    Unto the end that age to age shall see
  How your sweet face shrined in his life was lying,
    How in his heart you dwelt eternally--
  I bring to you this flowered branch, undying,
  Which knows no frost to sere its radiant spring!
    When you are dead I shall revive you, chaste
  And lovely; such the tribute that I bring,
    Who in your service find all bliss embraced!
  Like Laura, loved of Petrarch, you will live--
  At least, while books immortal life can give!




THE LITTLE VISITORS


[1] This final title has been altered since the printing of the Table
of Contents.


It was lately my good fortune--and I so term it advisedly--to
entertain a budding Bolshevist in my midst.

He was an excellent young man and a fellow writer, who had been
discharged as an officer of the nation's armed forces.  Not knowing
him intimately, I invited him, with his brother, to spend a part of
the summer in a cottage which I maintained as an office.

In due time the twain arrived and were heartily welcomed.  They were
made quite at home in my studio, which was furnished to my own fancy
with books, rugs, tools of the trade, rare and curious objects from
foreign parts, and, what occasioned much interest, an amount of
correspondence filed away.

The young gentlemen made themselves very much at home, and, in the
course of a few days' intimacy, confessed to a boyishly intense
sympathy with the Bolsheviki.  They reveled in a white-collar
abstinence, oblivious that the hated uniforms were vastly more
becoming than their present garb, and took a keen delight in tearing
to shreds the integrity of the press and the administration.  One
must admit that the latter was rather silly; but to think the press
of the world in a vast conspiracy of lies against Lenine et al.,
savored too much of a de Quincy phantasy.

Political creeds, of course, could not mar the pleasure of the visit.
But in course of time it gradually dawned upon me that my guests were
rather exacting in their way of taking things for granted.

They acquired a happy faculty of letting me run their errands, or of
utilizing my services as chauffeur.  The only argument against this
was its matter-of-course air.  I presume that the Bolsheviki, like
the Arabs, feel any expression of gratitude to be unworthy them.

Still, this was but a small cavil against great writers--men of
genius who had accomplished high things in their profession and were
attaining a worthy place in literature!

It was with some misgivings, however, that I observed certain very
odd tendencies; such as, for example, plying the gentle arts of
Munchausen upon the despised caste of editors.

When one delicately hinted that this might hardly be considered as
strictly ethical, the notion was greeted with roars of scornful
laughter.  Ethics were individual things entirely, much beneath the
consideration of free artists.  And what was an editor compared with
one who wrote literature?  Less than the dust!

However, the suggestion that it was the editor who wrote the checks,
proved to be sobering--amazingly sobering.

The days wore breezily on, with much writing and earnest endeavor,
and much discussion of why no man in the writing game today deserved
the place he held; that is, no man at the top.  One or two had some
facility; a little plot, perhaps, a gift of words, a lilt to
paragraphs--but this was "all they had."  The heroic dead, happily,
possessed virtues.

There began to be a Bolshevik atmosphere about the place, a vague and
unsatisfied air of much begun and little finished.  Oddly enough, my
friend were working on anti-red propaganda; excellent work, too, if
it did come but slowly.  Curious how antipathy to white collars seems
to involve in its anathema all forms of hard labor!

The visitors found the country lonely.  One evening I dropped in
unexpectedly at the office, and my presence seemed to excite an odd
embarrassment.  It developed that my friends were giving a party, so
of course I at once withdrew gracefully.

Some time later, a young man about town informed me, grinningly, that
them letters I got from editors were suttinly rich!  Upon inquiry I
found that my guests kindly elucidated the art of writing, to their
local acquaintance, by means of my correspondence.

Nor did they deny the matter.  They were so puzzled at my objections
that anger could not exist; since I did object, of course it would
occur no more.  In the face of so charming a simplicity, what could
the ruffled course of hospitality do but resume the even tenor of its
way?

But little things, as is their habit, in time grow onerous.  Around
the books, the rare and curious objects, the writing tools, climbed
filth and squalor unbelievable.  In despair, seeking the kindliest
way out of the impasse, I was summoned away for a month or so.  Not
without some misgivings--quite justified by events.

When I returned to the office, I found that my guests had departed.
So had many of my books and things.  In their stead remained castoff
raiment and much misplaced matter.

I have now adopted the firm rule of invariably inquiring into the
politics of a friend before erecting him into the status of a guest.




  Sonnet au Lecteur

  I hailed you, reader, after ancient wont,
    Crying "Bonjour!" upon my first fair page;
  Closes my book in type of gloomier font--
    For we are come into a perilous age.
    Gone are the golden days of merry wage,
  Of nymphs and laughing gods, of kings who ranted,
  Of sober men who jeered me for a child,
    Of merry fools who jeered me for a sage.
  In factioned strife our troubled time is veiled,
    Our poets sing, with politics inflamed;
  Yet shall I not be counted to have failed
    If you, who read me, read me once again!
    And if two words my wisdom may contain,
      Let them be Joy and Folly, unashamed!




  HERE ENDS THE BOOK
  BIGFOOT JOE & OTHERS

  HANDSET & PRINTED BY THE
  AUTHOR AND THIRTY COPIES
  DISTRIBUTED PRIVATELY




  From The Same Press

  Verse

  FIGS & THISTLES
  FRUIT BEFORE SUMMER
  GATHERED VERSE
  CORN WINE & OIL

  Prose

  THE MYTH WAWATAM
  L'ARBRE CROCHE MISSION
  SAN JUAN CAPISTRANO







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIGFOOT JOE AND OTHERS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
